22.3-1

Make a 3-by-3 chart with row and column labels WHITE, GRAY, and BLACK. In
each cell (i, j), indicate whether, at any point during a depth-first search of a directed
graph, there can be an edge from a vertex of color i to a vertex of color j.
For each possible edge, indicate what edge types it can be. Make a second such
chart for depth-first search of an undirected graph.

Solution:

Using Figure 22.4 as an example.

Directed:

   W | G | B
   ---------
W| X   X   X
G| T*  B   F, C
B| X   X   X

T* - tree edge

Undirected:

Same table except there's B (instead of F,C) for GRAY,BLACK edge


22.3-2

Show how depth-first search works on the graph of Figure 22.6. Assume that the
for loop of lines 5–7 of the DFS procedure considers the vertices in alphabetical
order, and assume that each adjacency list is ordered alphabetically. Show the
discovery and finishing times for each vertex, and show the classification of each
edge.

Solution:

Drawn in Bluebook


22.3-3

Show the parenthesis structure of the depth-first search of Figure 22.4.

Solution:

Ranges drawn in Bluebook

The parenthesis structure:
(u (v (y (x x) y) v) u) (w (z z) w)


22.3-4

Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by arguing that
the DFS procedure would produce the same result if line 3 of DFS-VISIT was
removed.

Solution:

Using Figure 22.4 as an example.

Just removing line 3 must cause infinite loop (edge x,v - checked in code). One of ways
to remedy this is to enhance line 5 of DFS-VISIT checking for non-zero u.d.


22.3-5

Show that edge (u, v) is
a. a tree edge or forward edge if and only if u.d < v.d < v.f < u.f,
b. a back edge if and only if v.d <= u.d < u.f <= v.f, and
c. a cross edge if and only if v.d < v.f < u.d < u.f.

Solution:

Using Figure 22.4 as an example.

a. Vertex v's range is completely within u's range, so v was discovered and finished
while exploring u.adj list.
Whether (u,v) is a tree or forward edge depends on whether v was white or black, which
in turn depends on the order of u.adj list.
